# UPHL_Reference_Free

Houses scripts Tiffany Hsu wrote to run the UPHL Reference Free pipeline, as \
well as the documentation for running it.

## Step 1: Login to your username. Pull or copy the repository into any location.

Pulling the repository is preferred, but the internet speeds are slow, so this \
make take up to 30 minutes. A better way to do this is to:
1. Go to the gitlab website
2. Download the repository onto a flash drive
3. Move the zipped folder into the directory of interest.

Note: It is fine to re-use the directory from your last run! Just note that if \
any programs have been updated, these changes won't be reflected. Also, you may \
want to store data from previous runs somewhere safe.


## Step 2: Create the directories for the pipeline.

Note: This step could possibly be skipped. Tiffany tested this once and it seemed \
to work.

Tiffany connected the tools within the UPHL Reference Free pipeline using the \
tool SnakeMake. SnakeMake requires you to create directories (or folders) to \
store the output before being run. Create directories within the \
`uphl_reference_free` folder.

```
# Run the included script to generate the directories.
$ sh scripts/initiate_dirs.sh 
```

## Step 3: Add your samples to the folder and put them in a list.

Samples should be inside `uphl_reference_free/BaseCalls` (inside a folder named\
`BaseCalls`). We only need the `fastq.gz` files. 

Next, add the names of the `R1_001.fastq.gz` files to a file named `samples.txt`.\
Be sure each sample is present once! (Don't put both `R1_001.fastq.gz` and \
`R2_001.fastq.gz`!)

```
# Move your files (in a folder named "BaseCalls" to the uphl_reference_free folder.
$ mkdir BaseCalls
$ cp -r /path/to/files /path/to/uphl_reference_free/BaseCalls

# Create a file with your sample names
## To do this via command line, first get your sample names
## Go into the folder BaseCalls
$ cd BaseCalls
## List your files
$ ls * | grep -v 'R1'
# Copy into a text file as below
```

You can also create your text file using the graphical user interface. 
1. Go to "Applications" > "Accessories" > "Text Editor"
2. Add the names of all the "R1" files.
3. Save the file as `samples.txt` in the `uphl_reference_free` folder.


## Step 4: Run the pipeline-of-interest.

At this point, you should be ready to run the:
1. Main pipeline
2. _Salmonella_ pipeline
3. _E. coli_ pipeline

To do this, invoke Snakemake. Note that each pipeline currently needs to be invoked \
separately. One of my goals is to make it so that by running the _Salmonella_ \
OR _E. coli_ pipeline, you automatically invoke the main pipeline.

### Running the main pipeline
```
# Make sure you are in the folder "uphl_reference_free" 
# Activate the snakemake environment
$ source activate /home/workflows/miniconda3/envs/snakemake

# Run the pipeline
$ snakemake -j --use-conda
# -j specifies what resources your computer can use to run th pipeline \
# we have up to 32 cores, but if you don't specify the value it will simply use \
all 32
# --use-conda forces the pipeline to install the other tools in your folder
```

### Running the _Salmonella_ pipeline.
This pipeline runs MASH, for checking the genus and species, as well as \
SeqSero (for typing Salmonella) on the cleaned reads (results from SeqyClean).
```
# Activate the snakemake environment
$ source activate /home/workflows/miniconda3/envs/snakemake

# Assuming you are in the "uphl_reference_free" folder, change directory into \
the salmonella folder
$ cd ./salmonella

# Copy over the "samples.txt" files. Samples are still under the "BaseCalls"\
folder.
$ cp ../samples.txt .

# Run the pipeline
$ snakemake -j --use-conda
```
Results will be located in the `uphl_reference_free-master/salmonella/seqsero` \
folder.


### Run the _E. coli_ pipeline.
This pipeline only runs SerotypeFinder and ResFinder on the assembled contigs \
(results from Shovill). It is currently incomplete.
```
# Activate the snakemake environment
$ source activate /home/workflows/miniconda3/envs/snakemake

# Assuming you are in the "uphl_reference_free" folder, change directory into \
the ecoli folder
$ cd ./ecoli

# Copy over the "samples.txt" files. Samples are still under the "BaseCalls"\
folder.
$ cp ../samples.txt .

# Run the pipeline
$ snakemake -j --use-conda
```

Results will be located in the `uphl_reference_free-master/ecoli` folder.


## Step 5: Find the pan-genome.

The pan-genome is defined as "all of the genes within a set of genomes." We will\
be using the tool (Roary)[https://sanger-pathogens.github.io/Roary/] to generate
the pan-genome. 

Roary takes genes from your set of genomes, and determine which genes are "core"\
genes (all species have them) as opposed to "dipensable" (specific to certain \
strains or species). In order to compare our strain set, we will be using the \
core genome output by Roary.

```
# 1. Identify all of the samples (genomes) you want to compare.
# 2. Take the genome file formats (gffs) generated by Prokka and place them in \
a folder. Make sure you are in the "uphl_reference_free" directory.
$ cd /path/to/uphl_reference_free
$ cp -r /path/to/prokka/*.gff /path/to/to_compare

# 3. Activate the Roary environment.
$ source activate /home/workflows/miniconda3/envs/roary

# 4. Make a directory for results, and run Roary
$ roary -p 32 -f roary -e -n path/to/to_compare/*.gff
```


## Step 6: Create a tree.

We will use iqtree, which uses maximum likelihood methods to create a tree.

```
# 1. Make a directory for the results
$ mkdir roary/iqtree 

# 2. Change directory into roary.
$ cd roary

# 2. Run iqtree
$ iqtree -s core_gene_alignment.aln -t RANDOM -m HKY+I+R -bb 1000 \
-pre iqtree/iqtree -nt AUTO
# Note that -pre gives the files a prefix
```


## Step 7: Visualize the tree.

UPHL does this in R. We can do this in:
1. FigTree
2. CLC Genomics Workbench

### FigTree
```
# Start FigTree 
$ java -jar /home/workflows/programs/FigTree_v1.4.3/lib/figtree.jar
# This should launch a user interface for FigTree
```
#### Within the program:
1. Go to: "File" > "Open". Then select your file, which should have the ending \
`*.treefile` (the tree) or `*.contree` (the consensus tree). You usually want the \
former.
2. You can manually annotate your samples if needed. However, if you have many \
samples to annotate, you may want to use "File" > "Import Annotations".

### CLC Genomics Workbench
1. CLC Genomics Workbench cannot see your files unless they are under \
`/home/<YOUR_USERNAME>/CLC_Data`. Move your iqtree files to a folder there.
2. You can then launch "CLC Genomics Workbench" and double click the `*.treefile` \
(the tree) or `*.contree` (the consensus tree) to view them.


## Helpful Tips:
* To check the status of the computer, use the command `htop`. This will show you \
the resources the computer is currently using.
* For now, after running this pipeline the first time, I would:
  * Start from Step 3, adding any new files into the folder `BaseCalls` and sample \
    names into the file `samples.txt`
  * Why is this?
    * If you repeat this from the start each time, you will have to redownload \
      all the programs (shovill, prokka, etc) each time.
    * This would normally not be a problem, but with the current internet speed,\
      will add another 1-2 hours to the pipeline.